[REP-2001] Add Dev Tools Variant (#355)
ros-infrastructure/rep: rep-2001.rst

REP: 2001
Title: ROS 2 Variants

> Author: Tully Foote <tfoote@openrobotics.org>, Mikael Arguedas <mikael@openrobotics.org>, Ruffin White <roxfoxpox@gmail.com>, David V. Lu!! <davidvlu@gmail.com>

Author: Y'all should add your names here.

Reviewer: Done in [70575c9](https://github.com/ros-infrastructure/rep/pull/355/commits/70575c978b0162ad5ca1b50c4c27481fbd75df96)

 * `perception`: The `perception` variant includes packages commonly used for perception capabilities.
 * `simulation`: The `simulation` variant includes packages that are needed for automated simulation,
   without extra debugging tools.

>  * `ros-build-essential`: The `ros-build-essential` ROS distribution independent variant includes only the packages that are required for building and compiling ROS 2 packages.

Reviewer 2: I think the problem with this statement is that a user who is unfamiliar with the distinction might think this is enough to compile locally.  So I might reword this to use the wording we are talking about elsewhere, something like:

```suggestion
 * `ros-build-essential`: The `ros-build-essential` ROS distribution independent variant includes only the packages that are required for building ROS 2 packages on the buildfarm.
```

Reviewer: I dislike "on the buildfarm" because it's not entirely correct. It _is_ possible to build ROS packages with just these, but it isn't easy and there's additional effort involved but it's probably more succinct to just equate the build farm with that situation.

However I cannot bring myself to merge an incomplete truth so here's a counter-suggestion:

```suggestion
 * `ros-build-essential`: The `ros-build-essential` ROS distribution independent variant includes only the packages that are required for building standalone ROS 2 packages. ROS developers should use `ros-dev-tools` instead for the full set of recommended tools.
```

Reviewer 2: Your update works for me, thanks.

      extends:  [ros_base]
      packages: [ros_ign_bridge, ros_ign_gazebo, ros_ign_image, ros_ign_interfaces]

Dev Tools
"""""""""

::

  - dev_tools:

>       packages: [python3-colcon-common-extensions, python3-flake8, python3-pip,

Reviewer: I'm curious about the rationale for including flake8 (and to a lesser degree pytest and pytest-cov) when these aren't ubiquitous dependencies for a ROS developer workflow.

Author: In short, they're on the list here: https://docs.ros.org/en/humble/Installation/Alternatives/Ubuntu-Development-Setup.html#install-development-tools-and-ros-tools

Personally, I would just go with `build-essential cmake git python3-colcon-common-extensions python3-pip python3-rosdep python3-setuptools python3-vcstool` but I was deferring to whoever wrote the installation page.

Reviewer 2: > I'm curious about the rationale for including flake8 (and to a lesser degree pytest and pytest-cov) when these aren't ubiquitous dependencies for a ROS developer workflow.

I'd honestly go even further than this, and add in the packages corresponding to the flake8 plugins that we expect to be there.  We've had lots and lots of problems where people have trouble getting the right combination of flake8 plugins to match CI, and get frustrated by this.  Adding them here won't totally solve it (if people are using pip installed packages, or venvs they could still have the problem), but it will at least help.

                 python3-pytest, python3-pytest-cov, python3-rosdep, python3-setuptools,

>                  python3-vcstool, cmake, git, wget]

Reviewer 2: The reason I've been hesitant on this is because this new package is a different kind of beast from all of the other ones in here.  In particular, all of the rest of the variants here depend on things directly generated by the ROS buildfarm (though of course they indirectly depend on things from the underlying operating system).

This new variant, instead, directly depends on a combination of things from the underlying operating system (wget, git, etc), as well as packages that are imported into ROS from elsewhere (python3-colcon-common-extensions).

That doesn't necessarily mean we shouldn't do it, but it is giving me pause both from a precedent standpoint (should we allow other collections of packages?), as well as a practical standpoint (will the buildfarm happily build this?).  I've been talking to @nuclearsandwich and @cottsay a little bit more about this, they may leave their thoughts about this as well.

Author: (That's not a threat, I more mean that I'm not adamant that it must be part of the REP and needs to go in `variants`)

Reviewer: Cementing some of my thoughts from the discussion Chris alluded to, I think that the biggest outward concern for this metapackage is that by using a ROS package for the variant, we either _only_ release this variant in a single distribution like Rolling or we end up with duplicate variants: `ros-rolling-dev-tools`, `ros-humble-dev-tools`, `ros-iron-dev-tools` which all install the same system-wide packages. This will generate some confusion as users ask questions like "Do I need the dev-tools package for a specific distribution?" or "do I need to source the distribution setup script to use these dev tools?"

Implementing this metapackage as an in-ROS variant is the expedient way to make it happen if those concerns don't worry anyone else. Overall I think having a package like this would greatly improve and streamline the setup instructions for working with source distributions of ROS on supported platforms and in that same discussion we talked about possibly having a `ros-build-essential` package which builds on the platform compiler toolchain to codify and provide the baseline packages which should be present during build farm package builds implicitly.

The rosdistro independent method for creating `ros-build-essential` and `ros-dev-tools` metapackages would be to create them with `equivs` and comparable tools for RPM distributions and distribute them through the ROS bootstrap repositories.

Author: I get the concern of having duplicate variants, but I worry about asserting that the dependencies will be the same for all distributions forever and always. What if the ghost of Dirk Thomas comes back and writes `colcon2` for ROS-2-K? If you install `ros-build-essential` does it have `python3-colcon-common-extensions` or `python3-colcon2`?

Author: Is `equivs` a specific repo like `variants`?

Reviewer: > I get the concern of having duplicate variants, but I worry about asserting that the dependencies will be the same for all distributions forever and always.

Yeah, that has crossed my mind as well but as it stands all of the tools in the variant now are ROS independent. For a time ROS 2's ament_package and ament_tools were included in each distribution but both were eventually dropped in favor of independent tools (ament_package is technically still in Rolling but it contains _only_ ROS 2 specific templates and no actual code).

It does not make sense, in my opinion, for this metapackage to include build tools (such as cmake, catkin, ament_cmake) since each package is expected to explicitly depend on the build tool that it uses, but if build tools were included, that would add weight to the ROS-dependent approach.

> What if the ghost of Dirk Thomas comes back and writes `colcon2` for ROS-2-K? If you install `ros-build-essential` does it have `python3-colcon-common-extensions` or `python3-colcon2`?

In point of fact, I think `ros-build-essential` has neither because neither is critical to build a ROS package on the build farm. But `ros-dev-tools` would either include both tools or include only the one that is the recommended build tool for all current distributions as the current proposal does by not including catkin-tools. For bootstrapping reasons, I don't foresee a situation where the officially recommended build tool is ever a ROS-dependent package like ament_tools was again.

> Is `equivs` a specific repo like `variants`?

Whoops, sorry for the jargon. [`equivs`](https://manpages.debian.org/testing/equivs/equivs-build.1.en.html) is a tool for building small Debian packages using just a control file instead of an entire package and `debian/` which makes creating small metapackages really straightforward (assuming you're only supporting Debian-derived platforms). It has been used in ROS 2 to create [trivial packages that satisfy package dependencies](https://github.com/nuclearsandwich/ros2-equivs) on platforms where they are not available since the package.xml format has no way to describe optional/opportunistic dependencies.

Author: NB: I'm explaining my rationale, but I'll be happy with whatever solution you and other experts come up with. 

All I want at the end of the day is a workflow where I can do this.

    sudo apt install ros-$ROSDISTRO-ros-base
    sudo apt install ros-SOMETHING
    rosdep install --from-paths src --ignore-src -y
    colcon build

Reviewer: > All I want at the end of the day is a workflow where I can do this.

Based on the upbeat tempo of the offline discussion we were having I think you have @clalancette, @cottsay, and myself all convinced that this would be a big improvement.

I think that we've passed the phase where we're resistant to the proposal (which for me was based on the novelty and not some principled opposition) and into the phase where we're trying to think through the implementation options and the effects of each of them to arrive at an optimal long term solution.

      packages: [perception, simulation, ros_ign_gazebo_demos]

ROS Distribution Independent (September 2022 - Ongoing)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

These variants are not released as ROS packages within each distribution as the others are.

> Instead they are made available as independent packages outside of any ROS distribution.

Reviewer 2: I have two comments here which are related.

First of all, one outcome I would love is from this work is for us to be able to simplify the instructions in https://docs.ros.org/en/rolling/Installation/Alternatives/Ubuntu-Development-Setup.html .  In particular, I would like it if https://docs.ros.org/en/rolling/Installation/Alternatives/Ubuntu-Development-Setup.html#install-development-tools-and-ros-tools was reduced to `sudo apt-update && sudo apt install -y ros-dev-tools`.

To get there, we would need to add all of the development tools from that documentation page to the `ros-dev-tools` variant.  Do we want to do that here?  Alternatively, we could add most of those tools as `package.xml` dependencies...somewhere, though it isn't totally clear to me where.

Depending on the answer to that question, we may have to scope the `ros-dev-tools` to be Ubuntu 22.04 and forwards.  That's because many of the packages in that documentation list were not available until Jammy.

Reviewer: I get into this in a separate line comment https://github.com/ros-infrastructure/rep/pull/355#discussion_r976894371

Going into each of the packages in that section.

* build-essential: We have to hash out some cross-platform specifics but this is in ros-dev-tools via ros-build-essential.
* cmake: in ros-dev-tools via ros-build-essential
* git: in ros-dev-tools via ros-build-essential (git is a requirement of several vendor packages but we also encourage explicit declaration where it is used so perhaps this could move to dev-tools directly)
* python3-colcon-common-extensions: ros-dev-tools
* flake8 + plugins: We should declare these in ament_flake8, it's been on my wishlist ever since we got them packaged in Ubuntu it just hasn't been my top priority:
  * python3-flake8
  * python3-flake8-blind-except
  * python3-flake8-builtins
  * python3-flake8-class-newline
  * python3-flake8-comprehensions
  * python3-flake8-deprecated
  * python3-flake8-docstrings
  * python3-flake8-import-order
  * python3-flake8-quotes
* python3-pip: I think we can actually drop this entirely, it used to be for installing flake8 extensions from pip but we install everything via apt now. "pip install" does not appear anywhere in that doc. 
* pytest and plugins: These are dependencies of [colcon-core](https://github.com/colcon/colcon-core/blob/0bf904e205aaae3055f9b8fefbdd4f52806b66e6/setup.cfg#L33-L39) although it's noted that they are technically conditional. I think their conditionality may have been due to the fact that they were not all available via apt. But either way colcon requires them to run tests. I could see these being "build essential" by virtue of being "test essential" but it sort of comes down to taste and convention. We expect every package to declare a dependency on its _build_ framework (`cmake` for `cmake`, `ament_cmake` for `ament_cmake`, etc) why not make them declare their test framework as well. The `ament_python` build type used to have a corresponding library but issues with how dependencies are specified in python and what is available during a sourcepkg job caused us to remove that (although new developments have made it potentially possible again in the future). I would expect such a build type to require pytest but as that's a hypothetical I'm not sure what the best thing to do today is yet. It irks me to think that these packages would be required here simply because they don't fit anywhere else.
  * python3-pytest
  * python3-pytest-cov
  * python3-pytest-repeat
  * python3-pytest-rerunfailures
* python3-rosdep: ros-dev-tools
* python3-setuptools: ros-build-essential
* python3-vcstool: ros-dev-tools
* wget: hah, this one I thought I actually tried to remove in favor of curl. It's in the instructions in order to fetch the ros2.repos file from GitHub. I am not sure that swapping wget for curl makes me feel any better but it is what we should do.

Reviewer 2: One overall comment that I just realized; all of these package names should be `rosdep` names, not Ubuntu package names.  Otherwise we can never make this work for other operating systems.  With that said, here are some comments on the package list (if I agree with your statement, I've just not said anything for brevity):

> build-essential: We have to hash out some cross-platform specifics but this is in ros-dev-tools via ros-build-essential.

But it is currently not explicitly listed in `ros-build-essential`.  Also, there is no rosdep key for it.

> flake8 + plugins: We should declare these in ament_flake8, it's been on my wishlist ever since we got them packaged in Ubuntu it just hasn't been my top priority

All right, that is fair enough.

>  python3-pip: I think we can actually drop this entirely, it used to be for installing flake8 extensions from pip but we install everything via apt now. "pip install" does not appear anywhere in that doc.

Good point.  I'm fine with dropping it.

> pytest and plugins: ... why not make them declare their test framework as well

I'm not sure I would classify the use of those plugins as a "test framework".  Pytest is the test framework, and most (if not all) packages that use it have an explicit dependency in their `package.xml` on the pytest rosdep key.  Some of them also declare dependencies on other `pytest` extensions, though that is not universal.  The issue here is that typically the package itself doesn't depend on `rerunfailures` and such; those are requirements imposed upon it by the external tool (usually `colcon`).  So this is a long way of saying that I think those plugins should be dependencies of `colcon-core` (which they currently are), and we should not add them here. (incidentally, `python3-pytest-cov` is a `Recommend` for `colcon-core`, not a straight-up dependency.  Maybe we should change that)

> wget: hah, this one I thought I actually tried to remove in favor of curl. It's in the instructions in order to fetch the ros2.repos file from GitHub. I am not sure that swapping wget for curl makes me feel any better but it is what we should do.

Actually, `wget` isn't used for the default instructions anymore; we switched to having `vcstool` directly get the file over HTTP (since it can do that).  That said, we use `wget` in enough places in the documentation (I count 47 uses) that I think we should add it here, even though it largely duplicates functionality with curl.

Reviewer: > Actually, `wget` isn't used for the default instructions anymore; we switched to having `vcstool` directly get the file over HTTP (since it can do that). That said, we use `wget` in enough places in the documentation (I count 47 uses) that I think we should add it here, even though it largely duplicates functionality with curl.

😖

> One overall comment that I just realized; all of these package names should be `rosdep` names, not Ubuntu package names.

The rosdep names for all but the most venerable of keys should match the Ubuntu package names so this is probably not a significant issue.

Reviewer 2: Sounds good.  This generally looks good to me now.

Build Essential
"""""""""""""""

::

 - ros-build-essential:
 - ros-build-essential:

>       packages: [cmake, git, python3-setuptools, wget]

Reviewer: `wget` isn't needed for package builds and should be in ros-dev-tools instead.

```suggestion
      packages: [cmake, git, python3-setuptools]
```

Reviewer: @cottsay should we make Python 3 itself explicitly required?

```suggestion
      packages: [cmake, git, python3, python3-setuptools]
```

Reviewer 3: > should we make Python 3 itself explicitly required?

It wouldn't hurt to call it out explicitly, especially in an increasingly possible setuptools-free future.

Reviewer: Add python3: [8a2e8ae](https://github.com/ros-infrastructure/rep/pull/355/commits/8a2e8ae56c9a1bc411d1bd341cae67497934a324)

Move wget: [91f54b3](https://github.com/ros-infrastructure/rep/pull/355/commits/91f54b31cd23e368829914d4cbc9d6a696f4f0b5)

>                  python3-setuptools, wget]

Reviewer 2: Two comments on this variant.  First, do we want to add `build-essential` to this list?  I think we discussed this before, but I don't remember the outcome of that discussion.

Second, do we really want `python3-colcon-common-extensions` in `ros-build-essential`, or should we move it into `ros-dev-tools`?  I ask because my understanding is that we wanted `ros-build-essential` to be available for the buildfarm to depend on.  But the binary and source packaging jobs on the buildfarm do not strictly depend on colcon, so it is unnecessary dependency there.  On the other hand, PR and dev jobs probably *do* depend on colcon, so maybe we just want to take the hit on that.  Just food for thought; I don't feel strongly either way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - ros-build-essential:
      packages: [cmake, git, python3-setuptools, wget]
```

I think these are the critical packages with the possible addition of python3 itself to support `ros_buildfarm` scripts. I'd be inclined to add `python3-ros-buildfarm` if we were using the release version but the official farm tracks HEAD.

`rosdep` and `colcon` aren't used to actually build binary packages on the build farm since by the time those builds are run on individual packages after bloom has already resolved rosdep keys to platform packages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - ros-build-essential:
      packages: [cmake, git, python3-setuptools, wget]
```

I think these are the critical packages with the possible addition of python3 itself to support `ros_buildfarm` scripts. I'd be inclined to add `python3-ros-buildfarm` if we were using the release version but the official farm tracks HEAD.

`rosdep` and `colcon` aren't used to actually build binary packages on the build farm since by the time those builds are run on individual packages after bloom has already resolved rosdep keys to platform packages.

Dev Tools
"""""""""

::

  - ros-dev-tools:
      extends:  [ros-build-essential]

>       packages: [python3-bloom, python3-colcon-common-extensions,
>                  python3-rosdep, python3-vcstool]

Reviewer: Move `wget` to the dev-tools variant instead.

```suggestion
      packages: [python3-bloom, python3-colcon-common-extensions,
                 python3-rosdep, python3-vcstool, wget]
```

Reviewer: [91f54b3](https://github.com/ros-infrastructure/rep/pull/355/commits/91f54b31cd23e368829914d4cbc9d6a696f4f0b5)

>   - ros-dev-tools:
>       extends:  [ros-build-essential]
>       packages: [python3-flake8, python3-pip, python3-pytest,
>                  python3-pytest-cov, python3-vcstool]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - ros-dev-tools:
      extends:  [ros-build-essential]
      packages: [python3-bloom, python3-colcon-common-extensions,
                 python3-rosdep, python3-vcstool]
```

We discussed this on an earlier revision https://github.com/ros-infrastructure/rep/pull/355#discussion_r908982708 but I don't think the pytest or flake8 packages belong here. I think that those should be per-package dependencies and moved out of the documentation where they occur.

The original reason they ended up there was because not all of the flake8 or pytest extensions used were available as apt packages in ROS 2's target platforms. They're available as-of Jammy and so we'll have to decide if it's worth adding them in dev-tools for the sake of ROS 2 Foxy.

I should have considered this as an explicit case for how to handle differences between distros for independent metapackages but I didn't because I don't think they belong in this metapackage for any distro in the first place.

      packages: [perception, simulation, ros_ign_gazebo_demos]

ROS Distribution Independent (September 2022 - Ongoing)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

These variants are not released as ROS packages within each distribution as the others are.
Instead they are made available as independent packages outside of any ROS distribution.

Build Essential
"""""""""""""""

> In addition to the explicitly listed packages this variant should include the base toolchain for any operating system (such as `build-essential`) on Debian as well as GNU Make and a C++ compiler if not already part of that toolchain.

Reviewer: I don't think there is a way to include this in the extends/packages format below so I pulled the descriptive text from the implementation README in infra-variants. Extra eyes here are appreciated.

Author: I'm not looking at any of the implementation at the moment, but it seems like there should be a [`build-essential` entry in the `rosdep/base.yaml`](https://github.com/ros/rosdistro/blob/master/rosdep/base.yaml)

Reviewer: > I'm not looking at any of the implementation at the moment, but it seems like there should be a [build-essential entry in the rosdep/base.yaml](https://github.com/ros/rosdistro/blob/master/rosdep/base.yaml)

I'm a bit conflicted about it at the moment. Since the infra-variants aren't ROS packages and don't use rosdep, it's not required for those packages to work and for Debian/Ubuntu specifically, I don't think anything is necessarily _supposed_ to depend on `build-essential` since it is meant to be assumed available when building any package and if a package has dependencies on specific contents of build-essential it should declare those instead.

The reason we're including it for ros-build-essential is that we intend a superset of it.

Since it's not required to have a rosdep key for it, it is not a blocker.

> In addition to the explicitly listed packages this variant should include the base toolchain for any operating system (such as `build-essential`) on Debian as well as GNU Make and a C++ compiler if not already part of that toolchain.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition to the explicitly listed packages this variant should include the base toolchain for any operating system (such as `build-essential` on Debian) as well as GNU Make and a C++ compiler if not already part of that toolchain.
```

Besides my edits, I'm wondering if we should remove the `GNU Make` reference; someday in the future when we make a Windows version of that, it won't be accurate.  On the other hand, I'm OK with deferring this until we get to that point.

Reviewer: > I'm wondering if we should remove the GNU Make reference; someday in the future when we make a Windows version of that, it won't be accurate. On the other hand, I'm OK with deferring this until we get to that point.

I think it would make more sense to make Windows the special case (since the MSVC toolchain would be the requirement instead). I've had issues building CMake projects in the default ROS configurations when BSD make is the default instead of GNU make.
